# A Geometric Morphometric approach to lithic backed flake categories

Guillermo Bustos-Pérez<sup>(1)</sup>  
Francesca Romagnoli<sup>(1)</sup>

<sup>(1)</sup>Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Departamento de
Prehistoria y Arqueología, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain

**Abstract**  
Paleolithic lithic assemblages are usually dominated by flakes which
present a high morphological variability. When analyzing Paleolithic
lithic assemblages, it is common to classify flakes into categories
based on their morphological and technological features which result
from the position of the flake in a knapping sequence and from the
organization of removals following a knapping strategy. For the analysis
of Middle Paleolithic lithic assemblages two categories of flakes are
commonly used: core edge flakes and pseudo-Levallois points. A third
type, core edge flakes with a limited back, is also commonly employed in
the archaeological literature providing an alternative category with a
definition that does not match the two previous types but shares many of
their morphological and technological features. The present study
addresses whether these flakes constitute discrete categories based on
their morphological and technological attributes. Geometric
morphometrics are employed on an experimental set composed of the three
categories of flakes to quantify morphological variation. Machine
Learning models and Principal Components biplots are employed to test
for the discreteness of the categories. Results indicate that Geometric
Morphometrics succeed in capturing the morphological and technological
features which characterize each type of product. Pseudo-Levallois
points present the highest discreteness of the three technological
products and while some degree of mixture exists between core edge
flakes and core edge flakes with a limited back, they are also highly
distinguishable between each other. It can be concluded that the three
categories are discrete and can be employed in technological lists of
products for the analysis of lithic assemblages, and that Geometric
Morphometrics can be employed to test for the validity of categories.

**Key words**: lithic analysis; lithic technology; geometric
morphometrics; Machine Learning

## 1. Introduction

Lithic artifacts constitute some of the most important and abundant
remains in Paleolithic sites. When analyzing lithic assemblages, in
addition to taking metric measurements and attributes it is common to
classify unretouched flakes according to their morphology and
technological features. This classification is a crucial part of lithic
analysis since it classifies flakes into technological categories. These
categories are technological because the retained features and
morphology are indicative of the knapping method from which they were
generated. These technological products usually reflect different
knapping strategies, different stages of reduction, but also variations
in the organization of removals and exploitation of the surface. Well
known examples of technological classifications of flakes are the
bipolar/on anvil flakes ([Callahan, 1996](#ref-callahan_bipolar_1996);
[Hayden, 1980](#ref-hayden_confusion_1980)) (Callahan, 1996; Hayden,
1980);

## 7. References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-callahan_bipolar_1996" class="csl-entry">

Callahan, E., 1996. The bipolar technique: The simplest way to make
stone tools for survival. Bulletin of Primitive Technology 12, 16–20.

</div>

<div id="ref-hayden_confusion_1980" class="csl-entry">

Hayden, B., 1980. Confusion in the Bipolar World: Bashed Pebbles and
Splintered Pieces. Lithic Technology 9, 2–7.
<https://doi.org/10.1080/01977261.1980.11754456>

</div>

</div>
